# Polk_mutagenesis
This GitHub project contains the code for the following research manuscript:

**Polk and DNA repair suppress tissue-specific mutagenesis by endogenous guanine adducts**<br>

## Abstract
Mutational signatures are complex patterns jointly shaped by the nature of the DNA lesion, the DNA repair mechanisms that suppress it, and lesion bypass, also known as translesion synthesis (TLS). TLS is a key determinant of mutagenesis, and much is known about its role in the response to exogenous DNA damage (e.g. UV). However, it is far less clear what endogenous lesions require TLS and its contribution to shaping the mutational landscape of different mammalian tissues. Here we use organoid culture, whole genome sequencing and NanoSeq to characterize somatic mutational patterns across a panel of mouse tissues deficient in the TLS polymerase Polk. We find that Polk suppresses a novel, tissue-specific mutational signature in liver and kidney, characterized by C>A, C>G and C>T mutations, with strong transcriptional-strand bias, demonstrating that Pol Kappa performs error-free bypass of endogenous guanine adducts. We show Nucleotide Excision Repair (NER) acts in parallel to counteract some of this damage, with NER-deficient Polk-/- livers showing increased mutagenesis compared to Polk-/- mice. We then combine targeted adductomics and biochemistry to show endogenous N2-dG lesions require Polk bypass and contribute to mutagenesis. Finally, we uncover novel endogenous guanine NER substrates with untargeted DNA adductomics. Together, our findings shed light on the nature of endogenous DNA damage and intimate link between the DNA repair and damage tolerance pathways that limit mutagenesis in tissues.
